---
layout: post
title: "ACT vs. SAT"
date: 2018-05-22
excerpt: "The differences between the tests"
tag:
- act
- sat
- differences
comments: true
---


## Time

The differences in how much time you are giving and how you have to pace yourself is in my opinion one of the biggest differences between the ACT and SAT. ACT gives you way less time to answer questions than the SAT does.

Here are the numbers

<figure>
    <a href="https://github.com/36ACT/MyPicture/blob/master/Screenshot%20(1).png?raw=true" img src="https://github.com/36ACT/MyPicture/blob/master/Screenshot%20(1).png?raw=true"></a>
</figure>


SAT Reading          52             65 minutes

SAT Writing          44	            35 minutes

SAT Math No Calc     20             25 minutes

SAT Math with Calc   38             55 minutes

As you can see, you have to solve questions much more quickly on the ACT compared to the SAT.

## Clarity
ACT makes up for the fact there is so much less time to answer their questions by making their questions much more straightforward. ACT questions are usually far easier to understand. Every answer can be easily found in the text and math questions rarely require tricks to solve. SAT on the other hand, gives tougher, more confusing problems, but gives you a lot of time to think about them.

## Math
ACT Math, like the rest of the test, is a lot more straightforward than SAT Math. However, ACT Math covers more topics than the SAT. You have to know trigonometry, imaginary numbers, and other concepts on the ACT which will not be covered on the SAT. However, the questions on the ACT Math are easier because they are worded simply and usually only test whether you know the equation or concept required to solve a problem, whereas the SAT gives you problems that are difficult to figure out even if you know the underlying concepts. 

## Science
SAT integrates science through its other sections, where you will have to read passages related to scientific topics. The ACT, however, has a single section specifically dedicated to science. In my opinion, ACT Science is much harder than the SAT’s science elements. ACT Science includes graphs that are far more complex than the ones you will encounter on the SAT. The passages are much harder to understand. Although the test focuses on your ability to read scientific information, it will also occasionally ask questions that can only be answered using outside scientific knowledge that you may or may not remember. 
This all sound very intimidating, but fear not. The ACT Science section is still very much doable. Many of the questions on the ACT Science section simply ask about data from tables and graphs in the passages. Even if you can barely understand the passage itself, it’s possible to get quite a few points simply from reading the graphs and tables.
Also, the questions that require prior scientific knowledge test your understanding of fairly basic concepts that you probably still remember. If you need to brush up, I recommend checking out PrepScholar’s guide, which can be found <a href= https://blog.prepscholar.com/the-only-actual-science-you-have-to-know-for-act-science >here.</a>
To be honest, ACT Science is more about reading than science, so don’t be scared away from taking the test because you’re not that great at science. However, I believe that ACT Science tests your ability to read graphs and scientific information much more than the SAT does.

## So Which One Do I Take?
I can go on and on about the differences between the two tests, but the best way to determine which test is the right fit for you is to take a practice test for both the SAT and ACT and find out which one you do better on. ACT tests can be found <a href = https://blog.prepscholar.com/complete-official-act-practice-tests-free-links>here</a> and SAT tests can be found <a href=https://blog.prepscholar.com/complete-official-sat-practice-tests-free-links>here.</a>

As always, let me know if there’s anything you guys think I could add to this post to make it better.
-Ahmed


